JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: In a
stunning move,
the White House announces
President Trump
has fired FBI Director James
Comey.
Plus, I sit down with Maine
Senator Susan
Collins to talk about the Comey
firing and
the fate of the Republicans'
health care bill
as it makes its way to her side
of Capitol
Hill.
And searching for hope in Havana
-- why some
lung cancer patients are making
the trek to
Cuba for a promising medication.
DR.
TIMOTHY GOGGINS, Oncologist: I'm
surprised
Mick's still here.
So, I do believe that, outside
of divine intervention,
there's some sort of scientific
basis to what
he's doing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Our lead story is
breaking
right this minute.
President Trump has fired James
Comey as the
director of the FBI.
White House Press Secretary Sean
Spicer made
the announcement just moments
ago.
And here to tell us what we know
at this time
is our own White House
correspondent John
Yang.
John, this looks like a bolt out
of the blue.
What have you learned?
JOHN YANG: It was absolutely out
of the blue.
It was after we were told, the
White House
press were told there would be
no more news
developments for the night.
Sean Spicer walked into the
Briefing Room,
read a very brief statement
saying that President
Trump had fired James Comey on
the recommendation
of the attorney general, Jeff
Sessions, and
the deputy attorney general, Rod
Rosenstein.
We're getting letters.
We're slowly getting bits and
pieces of the
reasons why, the letters that
Sessions sent
to the president recommending
this move and
Rosenstein's memo recommending
it as well.
It appears to center around
Comey's handling
of the investigation into
Hillary Clinton's
e-mails, ironically enough, that
his announcement,
his holding a press conference
in July clearing
her, but also criticizing her at
the same
time.
Usually, they don't make
statements like that.
Usually, they just say the
investigation is
closed, no charges have been
brought.
Rosenstein said his memo that
Comey -- that
-- I'm sorry -- he, Rosenstein,
doesn't understood
Comey's refusal to accept --
quote -- "nearly
universal judgment that he was
mistaken in
that."
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, mistaken in
not going ahead
and prosecuting Hillary Clinton
for what happened
with her e-mails?
JOHN YANG: As I understand it,
mistaken in
going public with what they had
gathered and
then saying we're not going the
prosecute,
rather than just saying, we're
closing this
investigation with no
prosecution.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John, did we know
that this
kind of an investigation was
under way at
the Justice Department looking
into Comey's
handling of the Clinton e-mail
matter?
JOHN YANG: The irony of this is
that all this
criticism had been coming from
the Democrats,
but apparently this was being
looked at within
the Justice Department.
Now, this is also an FBI
director who was
conducting an investigation into
possible
ties between the president's
campaign and
Russia.
There will be, I'm sure,
conspiracy theorists.
I'm sure there will be
allegations of, were
they looking for a reason to do
this?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And up until now,
President
Trump has given every indication
that he wanted
James Comey to continue.
JOHN YANG: Although today, very
telling, perhaps
tellingly, we don't know, there
was -- after
the letter was sent, he had to
correct, clean
up some of his testimony to the
Senate regarding
-- again regarding this e-mail
investigation,
a separate instance.
Sean Spicer was asked, does the
president
-- still have the support of the
president?
Sean said: I have not spoken to
the president
since this development.
I would be reluctant to say that
now without
speaking to the president first.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, John Yang,
again, this
story breaking just as we're
sitting here
this evening.
It broke just 15 minutes before
we went on
the air at 6:00 Eastern,
learning that the
-- from the White House, the
president has
fired the FBI director, James
Comey.
But the issue you're talking
about right now,
John, has to do with what James
Comey said
last month when he testified
before a Senate
hearing and, in essence, he
talked about how
he had handled the Clinton
e-mail matter.
JOHN YANG: And there had been
questions all
along in this process about
whether or not
Comey still had the support of
the president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
JOHN YANG: And the question was
asked again
today, and Sean Spicer didn't
give the support.
Now, there is one interesting
line in the
president's letter to Comey
firing him.
He said: "While I greatly
appreciate you informing
me on three separate
investigations that I
am not under investigation, I
nevertheless
concur with the judgment of the
Department
of Justice that you are not able
to effectively
lead the bureau."
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, John
Yang, I want
you to stay with us.
On the phone joining us now is
someone who
was a huge figure in the
Watergate investigation
back in the early 1970s, which,
of course,
led to the resignation of
then-President Richard
Nixon.
We're joined on the phone by
John Dean.
He was the White House counsel
then for President
Nixon.
John Dean, you're listening to
this.
What do you make of it?
JOHN DEAN, Former White House
Counsel: Well,
it's not totally surprising.
I was actually brooding about it
at lunch
and wondering how Comey was
going to deal
with the screw-up on his
testimony.
And I thought, for the sake of
the bureau,
he might step down, because he's
really splashed
mud all over themselves with
this one.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why did you think
this might
be so serious?
What was it about the mistake
which he made
in that testimony last month
that had you
questioning?
JOHN DEAN: Well, his rationale
for how he
handled the Clinton
investigation vs. vis-a-vis
the Trump investigation, where
he disclosed
one publicly and didn't disclose
the other,
is -- the rationale has been so
thin, and
the differences are really so
inconsequential,
that it made most -- really no
sense to what
he was saying.
So, now when he gets up and
bolsters his case
with bogus evidence, he looks
really bad.
And he doesn't look like a
director with an
even hand should look.
So, I don't know what Sessions
-- I didn't
hear anything about what
Sessions' position
was, but I thought he was in
trouble.
I mean, that was just in the air
to me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I was going to
read just briefly
from a portion of the letter
that was just
issued by the White House, by
the attorney
general, Jeff Sessions.
He says: "I have concluded a
fresh start is
needed at the leadership of the
FBI.
It's essential this Department
of Justice
clearly reaffirm its commitment
to longstanding
principles that ensure the
integrity and fairness
of federal investigations and
prosecutions."
They're clearly trying to
connect their concern
about James Comey with the way
the Justice
Department operates and the
confidence the
American people and, of course,
the president
have to have in that.
JOHN DEAN: Absolutely true.
You know, it's going to be very
difficult.
It's not unlike post-Watergate,
when they
had a very difficult time
deciding who to
select, and we had a series of
federal judges
who were put in there who were
absolutely
beyond any kind of question.
Bill Webster was put in that
post, if you
recall, a former sitting federal
district
court judge who had been a U.S.
attorney in
Saint Louis, and followed by
William Sessions,
who got fired.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Exactly.
Now, John Dean -- we're on the
phone with
John Dean, who, of course, was
the White House
counsel to Richard Nixon.
There are going to be a number
of comparisons
drawn out of this, one of them,
of course,
the Saturday night -- so-called
Saturday night
massacre, when President Nixon
fired his attorney
general and others because they
wouldn't carry
out his wishes in the time of
Watergate.
Any connection with that, or is
this a completely
different set of circumstances?
JOHN DEAN: I think this is
different, Judy.
I think it doesn't have any of
that kind of
feel.
Archibald Cox was defying the
president and
taking his own course of action
and taking
a -- making a decision that was
very much
placing Nixon in jeopardy.
So, I don't think we have any
similarities
here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just refresh
our memory
on the role of the FBI director.
This is intended to be an
independent position,
is it not?
I'm asking to remind everyone
that the FBI
is conducting a critical
investigation right
now into any connections between
the Trump
campaign for president and
Russian officials.
JOHN DEAN: Well, it was
post-Watergate that
they -- indeed, after Hoover,
that the Congress
made this a 10-year appointment,
to give it
some independence, where it
could go over
from one president to the next.
The presidents do have the
ability, if they
don't have confidence in the
director, to
fire him, but we have not seen
that very often.
It has been the exception to the
rule.
They have tried to depoliticize
the bureau,
which is the way it should be,
where we have
a politics-free federal
investigation unit,
but he is subject to the --
reports to the
attorney general, who, of
course, is a political
appointee.
So, there is always that filter.
But yet just the weight of the
bureau itself
carries its own independence.
And when it has strong
leadership, it is highly
respected.
When that leadership has not
been so strong,
it has been suspect.
And we -- you're absolutely
right.
It couldn't come at a more
difficult time,
given the implications of the
Russian hacking
and how that's going to all
unravel.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly,
to wrap up,
John Dean, your sense of what
has happened
here, you were saying at the
outset, didn't
surprise you that much, given
the mistake,
mistake in testimony that it
turns out James
Comey gave to the Congress last
month.
JOHN DEAN: Well, that certainly
gave both
-- because of the delay in
correcting it,
you immediately knew there was a
problem,
because Republicans had leaped
on it, they
were using it for political
purposes on bogus
information, so it was going the
embarrass
them by undercutting them.
So I just knew there was
trouble, and I didn't
know how far it would go, and I
thought Comey
himself might step away from it,
rather than
let anyone else resolve it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just to
refresh anyone
in the audience, what we're
speaking about
is when Director Comey spoke
before a Senate
committee last month and talked
about how
e-mails were transmitted from
Hillary Clinton's
e-mail -- I mean, from her
server to the e-mail
account of her assistant, Huma
Abedin, and
then they were printed out on --
by her husband,
the former Congressman Anthony
Weiner.
John Dean, thank you very much.
JOHN DEAN: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And here with me
at the table
at our studio in Washington,
John Yang, our
White House correspondent.
John, just to refresh everybody
who may be
tuning in, the breaking news
just moments
ago, President Trump has
announced he's fired
the FBI director, James Comey.
You now have some -- a little
bit of new information.
JOHN YANG: That's right, Judy.
We now have the memo that Deputy
Attorney
General Rod Rosenstein wrote to
the attorney
general recommending this
firing, and this
does indeed center on that press
conference
that Comey held in July 2016
detailing -- in
which he detailed Hillary
Clinton's use of
a private server and her
handling of classified
e-mails.
And in it, Rosenstein writes:
"The director
was wrong to usurp the attorney
general's
authority on July 5, 2016, and
announce his
conclusion that the case should
be closed
without prosecution.
It is not the function of the
director to
make such an announcement."
He goes on: "Compounding the
error, the director
ignored another longstanding
principle.
We do not hold press conferences
to release
derogatory information about the
subject of
a declined criminal
investigation.
Derogatory information sometimes
is disclosed
in the course of criminal
investigations and
prosecutions, but we never
release it gratuitously."
And in conclusion, he writes,
"Although the
-- says: "I agree with the
nearly unanimous
opinions of former department
officials the
way the director handled the
conclusion of
the e-mail investigation was
wrong.
As a result, the FBI is unlikely
to regain
public and congressional trust
until it has
a director who understands the
gravity of
the mistakes and pledges never
to repeat them."
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, again, it's
going back
to the announcement by James
Comey last summer,
blockbuster announcement, that
he made public
that the FBI had been looking
into the Clinton
e-mail matter and had determined
that there
was -- that it was messy, that
it was sloppy,
what Hillary Clinton had done,
in keeping
these -- putting in her personal
e-mail server
government e-mails, but he
concluded that
the law had not been broken and
that they
were not going to be -- and that
there was
no criminal intent and they were
not going
to prosecute.
JOHN YANG: The irony, of course,
Judy, is
that that press conference gave
Donald Trump
the candidate so much grist for
his campaign
speeches, for his rallies.
It led to the chants of "Lock
her up," and
now this is the basis for him to
fire the
FBI director.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And he was very
critical then.
Then, he himself was critical of
Director
Comey at that point, saying in
effect that
he was in the pocket of Hillary
Clinton, he
was doing what she wanted.
I remember we interviewed
Hillary Clinton
around that time.
She pointed out -- she and
others pointed
out James Comey had been known
as a Republican
before he came into the
administration.
JOHN YANG: Exactly.
And it was the Democrats, it was
the Hillary
Clinton campaign that blamed,
has blamed and
continues to blame James Comey
for Donald
Trump's victory and her defeat.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John, you have
been covering
this city for quite some time,
as I have.
What do you -- what can you
recall in the
past that equates to this
moment?
JOHN YANG: Yes, the only -- I
cannot recall
anything in the recent past.
The only thing that you
mentioned was the
Saturday night massacre during
Watergate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then we heard
John Dean
say it's a different situation.
JOHN YANG: Exactly, exactly,
exactly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it's -- what
we heard from
John Dean, in talking to Richard
Nixon's legal
counsel just now, is that he's
not so surprised.
He said, when the FBI director
makes a significant
mistake like that and takes
weeks to clear
it up, to clarify, he said,
that's not good.
JOHN YANG: Although that's not
the reason
why he's being fired.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Exactly.
And that was what got attention
earlier today.
JOHN YANG: Yes, exactly.
And that's what sparked the
question at the
briefing about whether the
president still
had confidence and trust in
Comey, a question
Spicer declined to answer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, John Yang,
this is a shocker.
So, unfair question: Any idea
who will be
named as a replacement?
JOHN YANG: All we know is that
the president
said that the search has begun,
that they
are looking for someone who will
restore trust
and confidence in the FBI.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
John Yang, I know you're going
to continue
to report on this, our White
House correspondent.
Thank you, John.
JOHN YANG: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, of course
we're going
to continue to update this story
throughout
the program.
Now, in the day's other news --
and there
was other news -- there's word
that the Trump
administration is considering a
plan to return
to an expanded role for the U.S.
military
in fighting the Taliban in
Afghanistan.
The Washington Post reported the
proposal
could send up to 3,000 more U.S.
troops to
the country, and give the
Pentagon, not the
White House, the power to set
troop levels.
President Trump is expected to
make a decision
before a NATO summit on May the
25th.
The Trump administration is also
ramping up
efforts to battle the Islamic
State in Syria
by arming Kurdish fighters there
with heavier
weapons.
It's all part of an operation to
recapture
the city of Raqqa from ISIS.
The decision was made despite
fierce opposition
from NATO ally Turkey, which
claims that the
Kurdish forces are linked to
rebels who are
battling the Turkish government.
White House officials today
defended a decision
not to immediately act on
warnings about former
National Security Adviser
Michael Flynn.
Former acting Attorney General
Sally Yates
had testified just yesterday
that she alerted
the White House in January that
Michael Flynn
could be blackmailed by the
Russians.
Press Secretary Sean Spicer
today said that
Yates' warning was minimized by
the White
House because she was, in his
words, a strong
supporter of Clinton.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
She had come here given a
heads-up, told us
there were materials.
And at the same time, we did
what we should
do.
Just because someone comes in
and gives you
a heads-up about something and
says I want
to share some information
doesn't mean that
you immediately jump the gun and
go take an
action.
I think if you flip the scenario
and say,
what if we had just dismissed
somebody because
a political opponent of the
president had
made an utterance, you would
argue that it
was pretty irrational to act in
that manner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In a related
development, CNN
is reporting that Republican
Senator Lindsey
Graham of South Carolina intends
to look into
President Trump's business
dealings in Russia.
Spicer responded by saying that
the president
has directed a law firm to send
Graham a certified
letter stating that the
president has no connections.
South Korea has elected a
liberal president
for the first time in a decade;
64-year-old
Moon Jae-in comes to power after
months of
political turmoil in that
country that led
to the impeachment of former
conservative
President Park Geun-hye.
With the highest turnout in 20
years, Moon
secured 41 percent of the vote,
leading his
nearest opponent by 17 points.
We will take a closer look at
the impact of
the election later in the
program.
Back in this country, the U.S.
Department
of Energy declared a state of
emergency after
a breach at a nuclear storage
facility some
200 miles southeast of Seattle,
Washington.
Workers at the Hanford Nuclear
Reservation
were evacuated or told to seek
cover after
the roof of a tunnel used to
transport nuclear
waste caved in.
The site's spokesperson updated
the situation
this afternoon on Facebook Live.
DESTRY HENDERSON, Hanford
Nuclear Reservation:
All personnel in the immediate
area have been
accounted for.
They are safe, and there's been
no evidence
of radiological release.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The effort to rid
the Hanford
site of radioactive material has
been ongoing
since it stopped producing
plutonium back
in the 1980s.
Violence erupted at a Florida
airport overnight
after Spirit Airlines canceled
nine flights,
stranding hundreds of travelers.
Enraged passengers swarmed the
ticket counters
at the Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood
International
airport when they were told
there were no
available pilots.
Three people were arrested.
Spirit Airlines blamed the
cancellations on
an ongoing dispute over the
pilots' contracts.
President Trump has set his
sights on reelection,
rolling out a revamped campaign
Web site today
touting his achievements thus
far.
It promises -- quote -- "the
truth that the
mainstream media is hiding"
about the president's
first 100 days in office.
Mr. Trump filed legal papers for
reelection
the same day he took office.
Nearly 250 migrants are missing
and feared
dead after two separate
shipwrecks in the
Mediterranean over the weekend.
Survivors from one wreck told
United Nations
agencies that smugglers crammed
more than
130 people onto a rubber boat
designed for
20 people.
Today, a U.N. spokeswoman gave a
grim assessment
of the number of migrants who've
disappeared
trying to make the perilous
journey.
®MD-BO /CECILE POUILLY, UNHCR:
The total
number of people who are feared
dead or missing
while trying to cross from North
Africa to
Italy since the beginning of the
year has
now reached more than 1,300
people, and a
total of over 43,000 people
trying to cross
the Central Mediterranean to
reach Italy since
the beginning of the year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Officials fear
the surge in
migration will continue to rise
as the weather
becomes warmer.
A new study has found that your
Americans'
lifespan can vary by as much as
20 years based
on where they live.
That's according to the
Institute for Health
Metrics and Evaluation at the
University of
Washington.
U.S. counties with the highest
life expectancy,
in Colorado and California, also
had high
incomes and education levels.
Communities with the lowest life
expectancy,
in the Dakotas, along the
Mississippi valley,
and in Appalachia, were poorer
and less educated.
And stocks were mixed on Wall
Street today.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 36 points
to close above 20975.
The Nasdaq rose nearly 18
points, and the
S&P 500 slipped two.
The Nasdaq rose nearly 18
points, and the
S&P 500 slipped two.
And we now get reaction from
Capitol Hill
to President Trump's firing of
FBI Director
James Comey.
I'm joined by Republican Susan
Collins of
Maine.
She serves on the Select
Committee on Intelligence.
Senator, we had invited you on
to talk about
health care, and maybe we will
get to that,
but I have to ask you about the
shocking news
just moments ago that the
president had fired
the FBI director.
What do you know about this?
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS (R), Maine: Well,
Judy, like
every other American, I'm just
learning about
this news.
I wonder in some ways if it were
the inevitable
conclusion to decisions that
were well-intentioned
by Mr. Comey that he made last
July in which
he held a press conference to
announce his
decision not to pursue an
indictment against
Hillary Clinton and went on to
give his personal
opinion in the case.
He did so in a manner that was
contrary to
the policies of the deep
Department of Justice,
although I have no doubt that
his intentions
were good.
This seemed to snowball in a way
that led
to the additional events last
fall, and embroiled
him in a political controversy
that had continued
to this day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He said at the
time, Senator,
that he felt he had to do that
because of
the huge importance of the
national presidential
election that was taking place,
and he owed
it to the American people.
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS: He did say that,
and I have
no doubt at all, knowing the FBI
director,
that he was sincere in his
conclusion and
in saying that.
But the fact is that the
Department of Justice
has very specific policies that
requires the
FBI to go to his superiors at
the Department
of Justice and get their
decision, and it
really wasn't his call.
And, in that area, it does
appear that his
actions were contrary to the
general rules
followed by the Department of
Justice, particularly
in dealing with very sensitive
criminal cases.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, do you think
this was the
right decision by President
Trump?
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS: Well, it's hard
to say, because
I'm still learning about it.
But I do think that perhaps it
was inevitable,
given the fact that Mr. Comey
has been unable
to put this controversy to rest,
and it was
contrary to the rules of the
Department of
Justice.
I do hope that the next FBI
director will
have the same kinds of
integrity, intelligence,
and determination that Mr. Comey
exhibited,
but perhaps better judgment on
when it's appropriate
to go public with the results of
an investigation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does this give
you confidence
in the Justice Department at
this moment,
in the administration at a time
when we know
this investigation is under way
into connections
between the Trump presidential
campaign and
Russian officials?
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS: Well, the
president didn't
fire the entire FBI.
He fired the director of the
FBI.
And I have every confidence that
the FBI will
continue pursuing its
investigation into the
Russian attempt to influence the
elections
last fall.
In addition, the Senate
Intelligence Committee
on which I serve is continuing
its bipartisan
investigation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you're saying
you feel
that's all going to go forward?
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS: I do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You have
confidence that all
goes forward as it should?
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS: Yes.
It should go forward, and it
will go forward.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
Senator Collins,
I do have a few minutes left.
And I want to ask you about the
health care
bill, because that is front and
center.
It's another issue very much
before the country.
All the reporting I have seen
says that Republicans
in the Senate at this point
wouldn't support
the health care reform bill that
came out
of the Republican majority in
the House of
Representatives.
Do you agree with that, and, if
so, why not?
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS: First of all, I
think that
it is evident that the Senate is
going to
draft its own bill.
I have a bill that Senator Bill
Cassidy of
Louisiana, who is a physician,
and I introduced
back in January.
And we think we have come up
with a better
model than what the House passed
just this
last week.
There are a lot of questions and
concerns
about the House bill.
It is difficult to evaluate it
because the
House voted prior to having a
Congressional
Budget Office analysis about the
impact of
the bill on coverage and on
cost, both to
the federal government and to
families and
individuals.
So, that is the major problem.
As we know, the earlier House
bill would have
resulted in 14 million people
losing their
coverage next year, 24 million
over 10 years.
That is an issue that concerns
me gravely.
I'm also concerned about the
substantial changes
that the House is proposing in
the Medicaid
program and whether that would
end up shifting
a lot of cost to state
government, to hospitals,
to nursing homes, and to those
of us who are
insured.
And there is another real flaw
in the House
bill, and that is that the tax
credits that
are proposed are not adjusted to
reflect the
income of the individual who
qualifies for
the credit.
So, it seems to me those tax
credits should
be weighted toward low-income
families and
individuals.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, as you know,
the House
leadership is very much behind
that bill,
for all the issues you point
out, but, Senator,
this is a complex piece of
legislation that
you and Senator Cassidy are
proposing.
But tell us in a nutshell, how
would it be
different?
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS: It would be very
different
from the House bill, because our
goal is to
actually expand coverage, rather
than reduce
the number of people covered.
And what we would do is give
more options
to the states.
And one of those options would
be that if
a state finds that the
Affordable Care Act
is working well for that state,
they could
keep that model.
For many states, it is not
working well, and
the individual market is on the
verge of collapse
and premiums have gone sky-high
and deductibles
are too burdensome for
low-income people.
We have a second plan that is
available in
our bill, which we call the
Better Choice,
which would set up health
savings accounts
for individuals that would be
federally funded
for low- and middle-income
families and individuals.
And they would be paired with a
high-deductible
plan, plus basic pharmaceutical
coverage.
Those health savings accounts
could be used
to buy more generous insurance
plans or to
pay first-dollar expenses, such
as your co-pays
or deductibles.
And it's important to note that,
regardless
of what choice a state makes,
that we would
keep all of the consumer
protections that
are in the Affordable Care Act,
such as protecting
people with preexisting
conditions, allowing
young people to stay on their
parents' policies
until age 26, no lifetime or
annual caps from
coverage, and also no
discrimination based
on gender or race or national
origin.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just quickly,
Senator, I'm
sure you know that, at this
point, you and
Senator Cassidy are pretty much
alone in supporting
this.
There haven't been many others
to sign on
to this.
What makes you confident you can
win support
for this proposal, when it does
preserve a
pretty significant chunk of
Obamacare, if
that's what states want to do?
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS: Well, we do have
three great
Republican co-sponsors.
And I'm pleased about that, so
there are five
Republicans on the bill.
But our goal is to have a
bipartisan bill.
One of the problems with
Obamacare is that
it was totally a partisan
effort.
And that was one reason that
there weren't
more Republican ideas
incorporated into the
bill, and we're seeing the
results of that
now.
We want a more market-oriented
reform, but
we also recognize that there are
some good
provisions in the Affordable
Care Act that
should be retained.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS: And that is why I
think, in
the end, we will be able to
attract some moderate
Democrats to our approach.
And I have had those discussions
that are
starting now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Susan
Collins of Maine,
we thank you very much for
talking both about
the FBI and about this
complicated health
care issue.
Thank you.
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now we get a
Democratic
perspective.
We're joined on the telephone by
Congressman
Eric Swalwell of California.
He serves on the House
Intelligence Committee.
Congressman Swalwell, your
reaction to the
news that President Trump has
fired the director
of the FBI, James Comey?
REP.
ERIC SWALWELL (D), California:
Good evening.
Judy.
This is an abuse of power unlike
anything
we have seen in our country
since President
Nixon.
I worry right now for our
democracy.
And I hope that Republicans join
me in making
sure that this investigation
into the president
doesn't go away, as it seems
like he wishes
it would.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, let me just
cite you a
little of what I just heard from
Senator Susan
Collins, who has been outspoken
at times in
her disagreement with President
Trump on different
issues.
But, in this instance, she said
in so many
words that she believes the FBI
director left
himself open when he violated
protocol, in
essence, violated the pattern of
behavior,
practice at the FBI, and went
public last
summer with the investigation
that the FBI
had conducted into Hillary
Clinton's e-mail
server, in saying that the FBI
wouldn't prosecute,
and yes, he had found that they
conducted
the investigation poorly, but
there would
be no prosecution.
And he talked about the
investigation.
REP.
ERIC SWALWELL: Judy, it's so
interesting to
hear Republicans defend Hillary
Clinton now.
And that's -- a reason that may
have been
believable when Donald Trump
took office on
January 20.
But since Donald Trump took
office, the FBI
director has told Congress and
the American
people that the president's
campaign is under
a criminal and
counterintelligence
investigation.
So, this is nothing more than
taking the headrest
off the court, and people should
see it exactly
as that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But the president
does have
the right, the authority to
remove the FBI
director.
Is that not right?
REP.
ERIC SWALWELL: He does.
And the Senate, of course, will
be, you know,
a part of a future FBI
director's confirmation.
However, past presidents have
shown restraint
in removing FBI directors when
their administrations
were under investigation.
And the fact that this president
could not
demonstrate that, I think, says
a lot about
how fearful he is about where
this FBI director
was going.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, again, to
the point that
both the attorney general, Jeff
Sessions,
made in the letter he put out
and this -- and,
again, I was just quoting,
poorly quoting
Senator Susan Collins -- their
point is that
what the FBI director did
violated longstanding
principles and, therefore, he
left himself
open for this sort of judgment.
REP.
ERIC SWALWELL: And, again, Judy,
that is something
that we didn't hear from any
Republican when
the FBI director made those
statements or
sent that letter.
So, for that to be the reason
now, again,
it is too late.
The FBI director is in the
middle of an investigation
into the president's campaign,
and to pull
him off this investigation is
very, very disturbing
for our democracy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally,
Congressman -- we're
talking with Congressman Eric
Swalwell of
California, a Democrat of
California -- what
do you expect will happen next?
Have you have had a chance to
talk to other
members of Congress about what
the next steps
are here?
REP.
ERIC SWALWELL: No.
And, right now, Judy, we're
piecing all of
this together to see what we can
do to preserve
the integrity of the FBI's
investigation and
also make sure that our own
House investigation
is one that is still
independent, credible,
and makes progress.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, and that --
and I do
want to ask you about that just
quickly, because
I asked Susan -- Senator Collins
about whether
she had confidence that the
Justice Department,
the FBI could continue to carry
out the investigation
into possible connections
between the Trump
campaign and Russian officials.
She said she does have that
confidence.
What would you answer be?
REP.
ERIC SWALWELL: Well, right now,
the attorney
general is recused on any
Russian investigation.
Now we are without an FBI
director, so I am
very, very worried that the
president's desire
to see this investigation, which
he called
a hoax just yesterday on
Twitter, is, He's
going to try and bury it.
And we must do everything we can
to keep light
shining on what happened with
Russia's interference
and make sure any U.S. persons
who were involved
are held accountable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Representative
Eric Swalwell
of California, member of the
House Intelligence
Committee, Congressman, thank
you very much
for talking with us.
REP.
ERIC SWALWELL: My pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now we turn
our focus to
Asia.
After months of political
upheaval, South
Korean voters have elected a new
president
today, a man who is promising to
take the
nation in a new direction.
President-elect Moon Jae-in
addressed throngs
of cheering supporters, and
offered a message
of unity to all South Koreans.
MOON JAE-IN, South Korean
President-Elect
(through translator): Starting
tomorrow, I
will become everyone's
president.
I will become a president who
unifies people
and serves even those people who
didn't support
me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Moon will assume
control of
the deeply divided government
after the fall
of his predecessor, Park
Geun-hye.
Park, South Korea's first female
president,
was impeached last year and
later arrested
on corruption charges.
She sits in jail now, and could
face up to
life in prison.
The allegations against her
sparked massive
months-long protests and were a
major factor
for voters ahead of the polls
today.
WOMAN (through translator): Park
Geun-hye
abused her national authority,
which angered
the people.
I voted with the hope of not
electing the
same kind of president again in
future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Moon now faces
several challenges,
both at home and abroad,
including an increasingly
provocative North Korea.
During the campaign, he called
for a return
to engagement with Pyongyang,
including economic
incentives that would be a
significant break
from recent South Korean policy.
Moon also said he will
reevaluate the U.S.
military's deployment of the
so-called THAAD
missile defense system to the
peninsula, which
has angered China.
All of this could lead to
friction with the
Trump White House.
President Trump has had tough
words, at times,
for the North, threatening
unilateral military
action.
But he's also said he would be
honored to
meet North Korean leader Kim
Jong-un under
the right circumstances.
And in an interview with CBS'
"Face the Nation,"
he said of Kim:
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
He was able to assume power.
A lot of people, I'm sure, tried
to take that
power away, whether it was his
uncle or anybody
else.
And he was able to do it.
So, obviously, he's a pretty
smart cookie.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For his part Moon
told The
Washington Post last week he's
on the same
page as Mr. Trump and believes
he is -- quote
-- "more reasonable" than he is
generally
perceived.
Today, the White House offered
congratulations
and said the U.S. looks forward
to working
with Moon.
We take a deeper look at Moon's
election and
its implications for South
Korea, and for
U.S. policy in the region, with
David Kang.
He is the director of the Korean
Studies Institute
at the University of Southern
California.
Professor Kang, thank you very
much for joining
us.
Give us a thumbnail sketch, if
you will, of
Mr. Moon.
What about his background?
DAVID KANG, University of
Southern California:
Well, I think the overriding
thing about Mr.
Moon is that he has worked for
sort of left
or progressive policies ever
since he was
a student and was arrested in
the 1970s in
pro-democracy movement, a human
rights lawyer,
and worked as a chief of staff
for a noted
progressive president 10 years
ago, Roh Moo-hyun.
So, he's very clearly on the
progressive or
leftist side of Korean politics.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, coming, what,
after almost
a decade of conservative rule in
South Korea,
why do you think voters chose
him?
DAVID KANG: Well, it's important
to remember
that there is domestic politics
in any country,
and the pendulum swings left and
right.
There were 10 years of left
presidents, and
then there were 10 years of
rightist presidents.
I think, in particular, there
has been a move
back to the left, which began
before Park
was getting impeached.
The electorate had elected a
majority national
assembly last year that was more
to the leftist
side.
So there was a lot of
expectation that the
country had wanted to be -- a
little bit more
engagement with North Korea and
was very concerned
about corruption and collusive
ties.
So in a way, it's not a surprise
that he won
the election, because the
electorate was swinging
left.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, how much
friendlier do
you expect his approach to North
Korea will
be?
DAVID KANG: I think there
actually is a chance
for some major changes.
Engagement, which he broadly
supports, is
a viable strategy.
And Moon actually has talked
about being very
forward-leaning, even opening a
joint economic
-- reopening a joint economic
zone between
North and South Korea.
I suspect one of the first
things he will
do is send an envoy to North
Korea to find
out what is even possible.
So, I think, in many ways, he's
going to be
much more proactive in dealing
with North
Korea than previous Korean
administrations
and the United States has been.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, speaking of
the U.S.,
what is his attitude toward the
U.S., and
what do we know of his attitude
toward President
Trump?
DAVID KANG: You know, in some
ways, it's a
misnomer that leftist Korean
presidents are
hard for the alliance.
Almost every Korean president,
left or right,
realizes that a good
relationship with Washington
is important.
And so, when he was chief of
staff, that was
when South Korea and the United
States signed
the free trade agreement, for
example.
So, I don't actually think there
will be that
much change in the U.S.
relationship.
He's also said the right things
about Trump,
which is, he thinks he can work
with Trump.
And I think that the particular
important
thing for Moon is to craft that
kind of personal
relationship with President
Trump.
For the last six months, we have
had a power
vacuum in South Korea.
There has been no president, so
there has
been no way for South Korea to
craft a relationship
with the U.S.
So, it's very important that he
does that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And two other
things.
What about his attitude, his
thinking about
China and its ability to, if you
will, get
the North Koreans to be more
cooperative?
DAVID KANG: Sure.
I think one thing that Moon will
do is, in
some ways, I think he will take
a more independent
stand.
I don't think he wants the lean
toward China,
any more than he wants the lean
toward the
United States.
He very clearly wants South
Korea to be the
driver of the relationship.
As such, I think he will push on
China for
cooperation, but, in many ways,
his approach,
which emphasizes economic
relations, fits
in with China's approach.
So, there may be more room to
cooperate than
we might think right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And one other
thing.
There has been some back and
forth between
the U.S. and South Korea
recently over this
missile defense system called
THAAD, the acronym.
What has he said about that?
What do you expect to happen
there?
DAVID KANG: You know, the U.S.
missile defense
system THAAD, I think in some
ways has gotten
blown up over the last year as a
bigger issue
than it really is.
China doesn't like it, but for
the last -- it
was announced last summer, so
we're coming
up on an entire year that THAAD
has been in
deployment and is now fully
deployed.
But China and the United States
had been negotiating
with an empty chair in South
Korea because
of the political power vacuum of
the previous
president.
So Moon has a lot on his plate,
but with the
proper diplomacy, I think he can
assuage some
of China's fears, while still
retaining the
missile defense system.
That's his task as a president,
is to be able
to deal with both of these big
countries at
the same time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Professor David
Kang at the
University of Southern
California, we thank
you.
DAVID KANG: My pleasure.
cancer
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: a promising
lung cancer
treatment from Cuba that's
drawing attention
from U.S. patients.
Some Americans are already
traveling there
to try the drug, in the hopes of
stopping
their cancer from growing.
Former President Obama cleared
the way for
collaboration between both
countries on such
research, and clinical trials
have started.
Those trials may take years.
But early results have some
researchers intrigued
by this new form of
immunotherapy.
Special correspondent Amy
Guttman has the
story.
AMY GUTTMAN: Mick Phillips
travels from his
home near Green Bay, Wisconsin,
to Cuba once
a year.
Despite his passion for vintage
cars, that's
not what draws him.
He goes there for CimaVax, a
Cuban-made drug
used to treat cancer that's kept
him alive
longer than any doctor
predicted.
MICK PHILLIPS, Cancer Patient:
So, I have
this little lunch box here
that's insulated.
And, in there, I carry my
medication and I
also carry gel packs.
AMY GUTTMAN: Phillips is 69
years old and
owns an industrial pump factory,
where he
continues to work every day.
He was first diagnosed with
non-small cell
lung cancer seven years ago.
After chemotherapy and radiation
treatment,
his cancer went into remission.
But it returned less than a year
later, in
2011.
He did another round of
chemotherapy, then
took CimaVax, and is now in
remission.
Fewer than 5 percent of stage 4
lung cancer
patients like Phillips survive
for five years.
But CimaVax appears to be
improving those
odds for some.
MICK PHILLIPS: I started the
CimaVax and have
been cancer-free ever since
then.
AMY GUTTMAN: And how long were
you supposed
to live once you went into
remission?
MICK PHILLIPS: The prognosis was
maybe six
months to a year.
AMY GUTTMAN: How many years ago
was that?
MICK PHILLIPS: That was six
years ago.
AMY GUTTMAN: At La Pradera, a
hotel-like hospital
near Havana, Phillips pays about
$5,000 for
an annual supply of CimaVax.
The doctor visit costs only $50.
Back in Wisconsin, Phillips says
he's lucky
that his oncologist, Dr. Timothy
Goggins,
continues to treat him.
American doctors can't prescribe
CimaVax,
because the Food and Drug
Administration won't
approve it until U.S. clinical
trials can
prove its effectiveness.
DR.
TIMOTHY GOGGINS, Oncologist: How
are things
going?
MICK PHILLIPS: Oh, pretty good.
AMY GUTTMAN: Dr. Goggins
monitors Phillips
with regular scans.
DR.
TIMOTHY GOGGINS: Compare this to
where he
is today, no evidence of growth
necessarily
in that area.
In fact, there might even be
shrinkage.
I would have expected, in this
case, further
growth, definitely within the
lungs.
I'm surprised Mick's still here.
So, I do believe that, outside
of divine intervention,
there's some sort of scientific
basis to what
he's doing.
AMY GUTTMAN: Published results
of trials done
in Cuba show those given CimaVax
lived, on
average, as little as three
months and as
much as 11 months longer than
those not given
the drug.
Some did even better.
Dr. Michael Caligiuri, president
of the American
Association for Cancer Research
says, even
with the success in Cuba, there
must be further
study.
DR.
MICHAEL CALIGIURI, President,
American Association
for Cancer Research: Whenever
there's an early
evidence of efficacy in a single
population,
a single institution study, the
chance that
it will be replicated
inter-institutionally
is real, but not a given.
AMY GUTTMAN: This facility
outside Havana
produces CimaVax.
It doesn't kill cancer cells.
Instead, it engages the
patient's immune system
to reduce the protein cancer
thrives on.
What makes this different from
other immunotherapies
is, it uses a patient's own
antibodies, rather
than manufactured ones, which
carries fewer
side effects and is cheaper.
Researchers at Roswell Park
Cancer Institute
in Buffalo, New York, waited
four years to
get the green light for clinical
trials of
CimaVax that began in January.
The institute's chair of
immunology, Dr. Kelvin
Lee, was in Havana recently for
a conference.
DR.
KELVIN LEE, Roswell Park Cancer
Institute:
In many cases, the tumors just
stop growing.
They're there, but they don't
get any bigger.
The patient has the possibility
of going on
for a very long time.
AMY GUTTMAN: CimaVax is given by
injection
and is considered a therapeutic
drug for now.
But Dr. Lee and his colleagues
are applying
for funding to test it as a
preventive vaccine
for high-risk patients.
DR.
KELVIN LEE: Because it is safe,
inexpensive,
easy to administer, you could
use it, potentially,
to prevent lung cancer.
AMY GUTTMAN: The embargo that
prevented Cuba's
access to American
pharmaceuticals led the
late President Fidel Castro to
invest heavily
in developing medicines and
vaccines.
Former President Obama traveled
to Cuba last
year.
He later announced new policies
making it
easier for American researchers
to apply for
FDA approval to trial Cuban
drugs in the United
States.
Mick Phillips voted for
President Trump, but
Mr. Trump has vowed to rollback
some of Obama's
policies when it comes to Cuba
relations.
Phillips fears what that could
mean.
MICK PHILLIPS: I am concerned
that access
to this medication will go away
for many,
many people.
AMY GUTTMAN: Dr. Lee says it's
all part of
a potential change in the way
doctors approach
cancer treatment.
DR.
KELVIN LEE: There is an idea
that's developing
of converting cancer into a
chronic disease.
We give you a pill that you take
every day,
and it allows you to live a
perfectly normal
life.
AMY GUTTMAN: Outside Cuba and
the U.S., there's
great interest in CimaVax.
It's approved in five different
countries.
Worldwide, 5,000 patients have
been treated
with the drug since 2011, 1,000
of them Cubans.
But no one sees CimaVax as a
magic pill.
Twenty percent of vaccinated
patients have
not lived longer than the
average survival
of the unvaccinated group.
Phillips' doctor, Tim Goggins,
says there
are many unknowns about the
drug.
DR.
TIMOTHY GOGGINS: At some point
in time, the
immune system will probably not
respond to
that cancer cell.
The cancer cells find a way
around it.
AMY GUTTMAN: Mick Phillips hopes
the new American
president will allow the
progress he credits
to Cuban drugs to continue.
MICK PHILLIPS: The key is that
the political
relations staying in place.
If that relation stays as it
should, I believe
that we can all benefit from it.
AMY GUTTMAN: Since taking
office, President
Trump has not said much more
about his approach
toward Cuba.
It's still unclear what this
could mean for
future trials of the drug.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Amy
Guttman reporting
from Havana.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As we reported at
the top of
tonight's "NewsHour," President
Trump abruptly
fired FBI Director James Comey
this evening
over his handling of the
investigation into
Hillary Clinton's e-mails.
The president said in a letter
to Comey it
is -- quote -- "essential that
we find new
leadership for the FBI that
restores public
trust and confidence in its
vital law enforcement
mission."
Moments ago, Republican Senator
John McCain
of Arizona weighed in on the
firing.
SEN.
JOHN MCCAIN (R), Arizona: I
regret that the
action had to be taken, and it's
unfortunate,
because I think he's a good man.
The president does have that
authority.
I have always believed that we
should have
a select committee to -- or a
commission,
because it's a very large issue
that's gotten
larger, and it will get more
large as time
goes by.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The number two
Democrat in
the Senate, Dick Durbin of
Illinois, also
questioned whether the FBI's
investigation
into Russian interference in the
last presidential
campaign would continue without
Comey.
SEN.
RICHARD DURBIN (D-IL), Minority
Whip: Any
attempt to stop or undermine
this FBI investigation
would raise grave constitutional
issues.
We await clarification by the
White House
as soon as possible as to
whether this investigation
will continue and whether it
will have a credible
lead, so that we know that it
will have a
just outcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also tonight,
Democratic Senator
Patrick Leahy called the firing
-- and I'm
quoting -- "nothing less than
Nixonian."
And late today, the Reuters news
service also
reported that U.S. intelligence
agencies were
given no advanced notice about
the president's
decision.
For more here at the end of the
show, we're
joined again by John Yang.
John, what more have you
learned?
JOHN YANG: No advanced notice
also to the
FBI, to the Justice Department.
Nobody seemed to have known
about this.
And, as you hear, the Democrats,
even though
this firing, the justification
for the firing
was the Clinton e-mail
investigation, Democrats
are focusing on the
investigation between
the Trump campaign and Russian
entities and
Russia.
Comey was scheduled to testify
on Thursday
before the Senate Intelligence
Committee.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Of this week.
JOHN YANG: This week.
And suddenly he's fired a couple
of days before.
Michael Schmidt, a reporter for
The New York
Times, tweeted that the White
House and the
Justice Department were, in his
words, working
on firing Comey for -- since at
least last
week.
He says that Sessions was, in
his words, working
on coming up with reasons for a
firing.
So, we have not confirmed that
reporting,
but that's the speculation.
Or that's his reporting, but
that's certainly
going to fuel the speculation
among Democrats
about what is really behind this
firing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It certainly is,
and fascinating,
and, again, focusing on what
Comey did with
regard to Hillary Clinton's
e-mails last summer.
John Yang, thank you.
And you're going to continue to
report on
it.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
You can watch our Web site for
updates on
President Trump's firing of the
FBI director.
That's PBS.org/NewsHour.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
For all of us at the "NewsHour,"
thank you,
and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "NewsHour,"
thank you,
and we will see you soon.